KEP-3066: subsecond probes (#3067)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/3066-subsecond-probes/README.md

Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from `int32` to `resource.Quantity`.

## Proposal

Add three new fields (of type `int32`) to the Probe struct, which would be used to handle time values in milliseconds:

- `periodSecondsMilliseconds`
- `initialDelaySecondsMilliseconds`
- `timeoutSecondsMilliseconds`

The seconds and milliseconds fields would be summed to get the appropriate duration. For example,

```
...
periodSeconds: 1
periodMilliseconds: 500
...
```

would be considered a period value of 1.5s or 1500ms. These values are used as `time.Duration` within the prober package ([ex1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/a750d8054a6cb3167f495829ce3e77ab0ccca48e/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go#L161) [ex2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/a750d8054a6cb3167f495829ce3e77ab0ccca48e/pkg/kubelet/prober/worker.go#L132) ), so there's no real difference between 1.5s and 1500ms.

A few additional examples:

`periodSeconds: 2` and `periodMilliseconds: -500` would be 0.5s / 500ms.

> `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodMilliseconds: -900` would be 0.1s / 100ms.

Reviewer: is not misleading this example, using negative numbers, if you mention later that it has to be a value between [0,1000] ?

Author: fixed below :-)

[meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ne57gvidMEWXR70OxxnRkYquAoMpt56o75oZtg-OeBg/edit#heading=h.by9uk7onna00)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

Changing defaults is a strict no-go.

Accidentally setting a timeout too low could DOS kubelet if many are used.
Mitigate by preventing timeout values too small.
Could be configurable,
100ms is a first guess, but could be adjusted based on user feedback during alpha and performance testing. Could also implement a scaling repeat to reduce risk of thrashing.

> Benchmarking currently WIP for alpha, will be implemented for beta to determine the ideal floor. Several benchmarking tools are being considered (options include ones developed by Knative, Amazon, Red Hat). Benchmarking tooling will also work for similar areas (such as the PLEG work.)

Author: added your comments below

      plane?
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
      of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
  automations, so be extremely careful here.

  No

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
  Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
  feature, can it break the existing applications?).

  Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**

  No breaking changes

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**
  The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
  gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created

>   with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about

Reviewer: The testing of feature gates on e2e is based on labels and the job configuration, is just that the the tests have to be added with the [Feature:xxxx] tag and configure the corresponding regex on the jobs that run alpha features
https://testgrid.k8s.io/google-gce#gci-gce-alpha-enabled-default
or just add your own jobs

Reviewer: point is, there has to be e2e tests :smile:

Author: that's just text from the NNNN-kep-template.. need to go back through and delete the template text...

Reviewer: lol, sorry,

    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99,9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

* **Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability
of this feature?**
  Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
  implementation difficulties, etc.).

### Dependencies

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

* **Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?**
  Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
  as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
  optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
  a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
  control plane.

  For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
  and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:

> ### Scalability

Reviewer: http probes that are performed by the kubelet instead executed via CRI has a lot of scalability problems
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/89898#issuecomment-1026703704 , I have doubts current http probes sent by the kubelet can work in subseconds :thinking: 

If just we have a CRI probe as you said here https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/102613#issuecomment-1065548274

Author: nod ... will benchmark it to get a feel for amount of reasonable improvement capable for http probe.. A big win to reduce setup cost, would be an imbedded implementation via a CRIProbe() API..

Reviewer: yeah, that is the point, I don't think that current implementation will scale, as you can see on the linked issues, users solve the problem via exec + curl

Author: if you get the timing right it will scale better.. timing wrong might be slightly worse..

- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

The Probe struct contains fields that specify seconds for intervals.
Some users would like to have intervals less than or slightly greater
than one second.

## Motivation

Better performance in the form of faster startups, more timely readiness checks...

#### Knative

For example, Knative will create Pods (via Deployment) and wait for them to become `Ready`
when handling an HTTP request from an end-user. In this case, Pod readiness
latency has a direct impact on HTTP request latency. (In the steady state,
Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

> An ability to specify timeouts that have more granularity, specificity, than just zero,

Reviewer 2: Should this be more targetted towards the first readiness vs. being available for all probes all the time?

Author: agreed will adjust

`periodSeconds: 0` and `periodMilliseconds: 500` would be 10.5s / 10500ms (as 0 => 10 for `periodSeconds` via [defaults.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3b13e9445a3bf86c94781c898f224e6690399178/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L213-L215))

`timeoutSeconds: 0` and `timeoutMilliseconds: 500` would be 1.5s / 1500ms (as 0 => 1 for `timeoutSeconds` via [defaults.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3b13e9445a3bf86c94781c898f224e6690399178/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L210-L212))

Each optional millisecond field will be restricted to [-999,999], and the effective sum will never be allowed
to be less than 0 (if the effective sum is less than 0, it will fail at the validation stage and block delployments).

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Knative

See the discussion from the Sept 14, 2021 SIG-Node meeting
[recording](https://youtu.be/LMh7c9e7H-Q?list=PL69nYSiGNLP1wJPj5DYWXjiArF-MJ5fNG&t=1049)
[meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ne57gvidMEWXR70OxxnRkYquAoMpt56o75oZtg-OeBg/edit#heading=h.by9uk7onna00)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

Changing defaults is a strict no-go.

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 3: calling out use case flows:

1) exec probe - kubelet invokes runtime which hits pod
2) http probe - kubelet invokes pod direct
3) grpc probe - kubelet invokes pod direct

having this API for all probe types may be problematic from resource tracking and future guaranteed execution.  kubelet probe scheduling today is a soft promise that is fulfilled best effort.

in the case of exec probes, the cgroup (and its intermediate) are not always charged to the pod cgroup (which ideally should influence rate limit of probes itself).  cri-o can charge exec probe to the pod, so abuse is less prone there as it impacts the workload, but an abusive exec probe if the process is charged to the management of the node could cause more problems.

Author: done/resolved thx!

> Accidentally setting a timeout too low could DOS kubelet if many are used.

Reviewer 2: could lead to node instability especially if a lot of the probes are exec probes.

Author: will add that comment

Will mitigate by preventing timeout values that are too small.
Could be configurable,

> 100ms is a first guess, but will be adjusted based on user feedback during alpha and performance testing. Will also implement a scaling of the periodMilliseconds field to further reduce risk of thrashing.

Reviewer 2: I think exec vs. other types of probes will vary a lot in how much time they take to execute so need to look into that as well.

Author: nod.. perhaps based on type makes more sense..

Author: latest commit changes to ^

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L227-L229

```go
	if obj.PeriodSeconds == 0 {
		obj.PeriodSeconds = 10
	}
```

#### Validation of fields

Must be non-negative, Zero or greater.
```go
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.InitialDelaySeconds), fldPath.Child("initialDelaySeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.TimeoutSeconds), fldPath.Child("timeoutSeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.PeriodSeconds), fldPath.Child("periodSeconds"))...)

```

#### Fields to Add
What fields may be necessary to add?

In pkg/apis/core/types.go

```go

type Probe struct {
    ...
    ...
    // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe.
	// +optional
	PeriodMilliseconds *int32
	// Length of time (in milliseconds) to offset IntialDelaySeconds before health checking is activated.
	// +optional
	InitialDelayMilliseconds *int32
	// Length of time (in milliseconds) to offset TimeoutMilliseconds before health checking times out.
	// +optional
	TimeoutMilliseconds *int32
}

```

> #### Logic for Added Fields

Reviewer 3: can this be restricted in validation to specific probes?

is it possible to only provide these higher granularities when a pod is not ready/live/startup, but once its in its happy state, we can backoff to a regular cadence?

Author: let's start alpha with:

Readiness and Startup supported for alpha, Liveness not supported in alpha 

type
====
exec(500ms minimum duration for one check drop back to the original second range/value after first check)
grpc(200ms minimum for one check drop back to the original second range)
http(200ms minimum for one check drop back to the original second range)

note for exec, grpc, http .. for startup and readiness will will support the millisecond range greater than zero.. in other words if they know 1.4 seconds is the right range and 1s just will not work they can ask for 1second plus 400mills vs having to go pick one of 1second where the first is known to fail or 2 where they know it's 600mills slower than it should be because 99% of runs will be less than 1.4s

Author: let's start alpha with:

Readiness and Startup supported for alpha, Liveness not supported in alpha 

type
====
exec(500ms minimum periodSeconds until success, then drop back to the original second range/value after first check)
grpc(200ms minimum until success, then drop back to the original second range)
http(200ms minimum until success, then drop back to the original second range)

note for exec, grpc, http .. for startup and readiness will will support the millisecond range greater than zero.. in other words if they know 1.4 seconds is the right range and 1s just will not work they can ask for 1second plus 400mills vs having to go pick one of 1second where the first is known to fail or 2 where they know it's 600mills slower than it should be because 99% of runs will be less than 1.4s   

keep initialDelayMilliseconds because zero is the current minimum..

the periodMilliseconds option for periodSeconds becomes a till success with appropriate minimums

will investigate timeoutMilliseconds for inclusion/exclusion based on validity of use cases (probably exclude)

Author: should be resolved now ... cheers

Reviewer 4: These changes would be fine for our knative use case

	// Do it only if the kubelet has started recently.
	if probeTickerPeriod > time.Since(w.probeManager.start) {
		time.Sleep(time.Duration(rand.Float64() * float64(probeTickerPeriod)))
	}

	probeTicker := time.NewTicker(probeTickerPeriod)

	defer func() {
		// Clean up.
		probeTicker.Stop()
		if !w.containerID.IsEmpty() {
			w.resultsManager.Remove(w.containerID)
		}

		w.probeManager.removeWorker(w.pod.UID, w.container.Name, w.probeType)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsSuccessfulMetricLabels)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsFailedMetricLabels)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsUnknownMetricLabels)
	}()

probeLoop:
	for w.doProbe() {
		// Wait for next probe tick.
		select {
		case <-w.stopCh:
			break probeLoop
		case <-probeTicker.C:
		case <-w.manualTriggerCh:
			// continue
		}
	}
}
```

### Summary

The Kubernetes design for Probes includes a Probe struct containing
fields that specify seconds for intervals.
Some users would like to have intervals less than or slightly greater
than one second.
This KEP adds sub-second interval capablilities to Kubernetes Liveness,
Readiness, and Startup Probes.

> ### Test Plan
> 
> 
> Existing unit tests of prober `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober_manager_test.go`.
> 
> Existing node-e2e test `k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/common/container_probe.go`
> 
> Enhanced with additional test cases, see the buckets added in [the draft implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/107958/commits)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

Unit tests, end-to-end tests, and performance tests/benchmarks will need to be added.

For actual tests to be added, see [the draft implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/107958/commits)

##### Unit tests

Will add unit tests for new code, specifically in:

- `pkg/api/pod`: `2022-10-03` - `70.1`
- `pkg/apis/core/validation`: `2022-10-03` - `82.3`
- `pkg/kubelet/prober`: `2022-10-03` - `80.7`

##### Integration tests

Not adding integration tests (will be covered by e2e). 

##### e2e tests

Will add e2e tests to `test/e2e/common/node/container_probe.go` to (a) run a sub-second probe, and (b) ensure the sub-second probe completes faster than a standard (1s) probe.

```

Reviewer 4: @mikebrow

Better performance in the form of faster startups, more timely readiness checks...

#### Knative

For example, Knative will create Pods (via Deployment) and wait for them to become `Ready`
when handling an HTTP request from an end-user. In this case, Pod readiness
latency has a direct impact on HTTP request latency. (In the steady state,
Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

An ability to specify probe durations that have more granularity, more specificity, than just zero,
one, or n-seconds. Focus is on possibly faster readiness probes, for example every .5 seconds until succss
and more granular use beyond existing defaults, for example 1.5 second duration instead of picking
between 1 or 2 second duration.
Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.
Not breaking backwards compatibility with the V1 API.

### Non-Goals

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from `int32` to `resource.Quantity`.

## Proposal

TLDR:
Add two new optional fields (of type `*int32`) to the Probe struct, which would be used to offset the second based time values in the Probe struct:

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Reviewer 5: This is somewhat unusual - the "period offset used the first time".  While it is the most backwards compatible version of the change, it is very non obvious to users and potentially non-obvious to implementers from the field name.  I notice in your comments that we are tending to use the word "offset" to describe this field - it would be clearer if the field name included offset as well - perhaps `periodOffsetMilliseconds` and `initialDelayOffsetMilliseconds`.

Reviewer 5: Also, the godoc should include the range of allowed values - `[-999,999]` if that is intended (as a later comment implied), as well as other implications.  Might as well get these in shape so that the proposal more clearly summarizes the change.

Reviewer 5: Finally, the comment about unnecessary resource usage is confusing and doesn't seem to be justified in the proposal below (I see comments about more data needed?). You might want to reword and summarize this (in what we show to users) as

> Probe periods shorter than one second may be lengthened when a node is under resource pressure.

In general I think it's well within the bounds of a health checker implementation to probe less often than requested, which the proposal should clarify even if we are vague about when that may happen to the user.  While we could be very specific (perhaps the 200 and 500ms values from below), it's not clear from a conformance perspective how we would enforce this value (or even if we should).

Author: nod..

Author: incorporated..

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Reviewer 6: do we want to start using smaller period again when probe has failed before the next success?

Author: good question will think it over.. can see arguments for both answers

Author: but it's not clear if that should be "exposed" to the probe api and/or managed by kubelet based on resource constraints

More generally, the effective period value would be = `periodSeconds` + `periodMilliseconds`.

There are a few corner cases around default (effective period) values:

`periodSeconds: 0` and `periodMilliseconds: 500` would be 10.5s / 10500ms (as 0 => 10 for `periodSeconds` via [defaults.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3b13e9445a3bf86c94781c898f224e6690399178/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L213-L215))

Each optional millisecond field will be restricted to [-999,999], and the effective sum will never be allowed
to be less than 0 (if the effective sum is less than 0, it will fail at the validation stage and block deployments).

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Knative

See the discussion from the Sept 14, 2021 SIG-Node meeting
[recording](https://youtu.be/LMh7c9e7H-Q?list=PL69nYSiGNLP1wJPj5DYWXjiArF-MJ5fNG&t=1049)
[meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Ne57gvidMEWXR70OxxnRkYquAoMpt56o75oZtg-OeBg/edit#heading=h.by9uk7onna00)

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

> Changing defaults is a strict no-go.

Reviewer 5: I would remove this with a more nuanced integration of the feedback below (depending on what we settle on).  Defaults may change when new fields are introduced, but we cannot widen validation, so we risk confusing users.  A user who wants a `200ms` period should set `periodSeconds: 1, periodOffsetMilliseconds -800`, and that is ok.

Author: nod

### Risks and Mitigations

Accidentally setting a timeout too low could DOS kubelet if many are used.
Thus will mitigate by preventing timeout values that are too small or to often:

> exec(500ms minimum periodSeconds until success, then drop back to the original second range/value)

Reviewer 5: Is there justification for these values, and the behavior?  This more looks like notes than an argument for why these values are correct?

I think the risk is worth mitigating, but I might suggest to simplify the mitigation until we can justify it.  If we don't believe it applies equally across all use cases, allow the value to be tuned per kubelet with a reasonably shorter default that doesn't impact CPU dramatically.  Clearly communicate to users that nodes / health checks *may* be run less frequently than requested, but don't explicitly document to users a public guarantee.

Author: exec probes are expensive (time and resource) even for simple ones..

nod to the argument to make it tunable.. and to the communication request..

Reviewer 5: Even a basic order of magnitude (x CPU, y ms) here would be good to add here as reference just so people see the magnitudes.  I.e. "We observe the following cost to health checks, x y z exec probes often take substantially more CPU as we must communicate via CRI and open an exec session, and therefore we seek to bound the impact of aggressive health check periods on the kubelet in the following ways: ..."

Author: thx, incorporated...

	// value overrides the value provided by the pod spec.
	// Value must be non-negative integer. The value zero indicates stop immediately via
	// the kill signal (no opportunity to shut down).
	// This is a beta field and requires enabling ProbeTerminationGracePeriod feature gate.
	// +optional
	TerminationGracePeriodSeconds *int64
}
```

### Existing Behavior

Taking the Seconds fields, in order of the struct.
InitialDelaySeconds
TimeoutSeconds
PeriodSeconds

#### Defaulting logic
 - InitialDelaySeconds, has no defaulting logic.
   Therefore it would get the golang defaulting logic, and default to 0.
 - TimeoutSeconds, defaults to 1 second if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). This is the last ending time before the timeout fails. Defaulting, thus, results in slow failures (when one considers a full second of time in cpu time).
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L224-L226

```go
 	if obj.TimeoutSeconds == 0 {
		obj.TimeoutSeconds = 1
	}
```

 - Period Seconds is the biggest hurdle in charging and overall cost to the cluster, but also the most useful if set correctly.

> PeriodSeconds defaults to 10 seconds if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). Fast failure detections are thus blocked with existing defaults.

Reviewer 5: I would expect the new fields’ presence to block the defaulting on the old field.  That preserves user intent and is forward compatible for older objects.

I was surprised to see this approach taken (assuming we can’t skip defaulting when a second field is present), is there a discussion with a reviewer (i didn’t see this discussed in the doc text) pointing in that direction?

If we preserve the base duration defaulting we can’t change that in the future without a third field, barring a really good argument I would argue preserving the old defaulting is user hostile and confusing (and once done, is even worse to undo later).

Reviewer 5: At minimum I need to see this question resolved prior to the api change merging, but better to do it here.

Author: note: this is in the existing behavior section 
See above for proposed change and examples copied here:
```
`periodSeconds: 1` and `periodMilliseconds: -500` would be 0.5s / 500ms. (*** To reduce un-necessary resource usage, because periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer becoming 1second after success.)

 More generally, the effective period value would be = `periodSeconds` + `periodMilliseconds`.

 There are a few corner cases around default (effective period) values:

 `periodSeconds: 0` and `periodMilliseconds: 500` would be 10.5s / 10500ms (as 0 => 10 for `periodSeconds` via [defaults.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3b13e9445a3bf86c94781c898f224e6690399178/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L213-L215))
```
Is this acceptable? .. cheers..

Author: Changing periodSeconds defaulting behavior when periodMilliseconds is set, and the gate is on/enabled in a release of kubelet that supports it, and periodSeconds is set to zero based on a user "intent" understanding to override the existing defaulting behavior if the gate is on in a newer release and back to 10 seconds if run with gate off or deployed to an older release.. I believe that would be a new proposal.

Author: if the reviewers feel overriding of default behavior with the gate on and when mills are present.. Works for me :-)

Reviewer 4: I think we landed on not changing the default behavior because we assumed that would be an [incompatible change](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#on-compatibility) and thus a no-go. But if that's not the case, then agree that overriding the 0->10 default would be ideal.

Reviewer 5: I do not believe that changing defaulting behavior in the presence of a new optional field is incompatible according to our definition.  The reason being is that we change behavior **when we add new optional fields**.  For instance, pod readiness gates delay readiness indefinitely.  The "default" behavior (scare quotes deliberate) is that pods go ready as soon as their readiness test passes, but adding readiness gates (which old clients aren't aware of) will change that behavior in a way that an old client can't observe but is nevertheless different.

The presence of an additional field is sufficient justification to change the observed behavior of an existing field across API versions, even if an older client can't observe *why* the behavior changed.

Server-defaulting changes would be a subset of general API behavior changes.  A client that doesn't provide the readiness probe duration is accepting the server default, and they generally expect the observed behavior of that default to not change across new versions **absent another input**.  That additional input is generally new API fields, but occasionally administrator configuration or a security fix will also alter the behavior.  Sometimes the observed behavior is incorrect - we might alter the server defaulted value if a serious bug is the consequence of the current defaulted value.

So, unless there is a very strong argument (will check with api-reviewers), **the presence of a new field may alter the defaulting of an existing field as long as the user can reason about the interaction of those fields and validation is correctly handled**.

Author: nod.. 

on the confusing users issue I can be swayed both ways .. to use the field as an offset and boolean override of the 10second default.. or leave it. Key will, IMO, be to provide explicit documentation examples to eliminate all confusion and proper tests to ensure it works as advertised.

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L227-L229

```go
	if obj.PeriodSeconds == 0 {
		obj.PeriodSeconds = 10
	}
```

#### Validation of fields

Must be non-negative, Zero or greater.
```go
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.InitialDelaySeconds), fldPath.Child("initialDelaySeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.TimeoutSeconds), fldPath.Child("timeoutSeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.PeriodSeconds), fldPath.Child("periodSeconds"))...)

```

#### Fields to Add
What fields may be necessary to add?

In pkg/apis/core/types.go

```go

type Probe struct {
    ...
    ...

>     // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe.

Reviewer 6: I think the phrase "How often to offset" is misleading. Like we keep offsetting with this periodicity.

```suggestion
    // The offset in milliseconds to PeriodSeconds to change how often to perform the probe before it succeeded.
```

- `InitialOffsetDelayMilliseconds` // Length of time (in milliseconds) to offset IntialDelaySeconds before health checking is activated. Values must be between [-999,999], and the effective sum of `InitialDelaySeconds` and `InitialOffsetDelayMilliseconds` must be greater than or equal to 0.

The seconds and milliseconds fields (as related) will be summed to get the resulting time duration. For example,

```yaml
...
#yaml
periodSeconds: 1
periodOffsetMilliseconds: 500
...
```

would be considered a period value of 1.5s or 1500ms. These values are used as `time.Duration` within the prober package ([ex1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/a750d8054a6cb3167f495829ce3e77ab0ccca48e/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go#L161) [ex2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/a750d8054a6cb3167f495829ce3e77ab0ccca48e/pkg/kubelet/prober/worker.go#L132) ), so there's no real difference between 1.5s and 1500ms.

A few additional examples:

`periodSeconds: 2` and `periodOffsetMilliseconds: -500` would be 1.5s / 1500ms.

> `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodOffsetMilliseconds: -500` would be 0.5s / 500ms. (*** To reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodOffsetMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second, the resulting duration will not be guaranteed by kubelet. Kubelet may adjust the offset based on available resources.)

Reviewer 2: Not blocking - Not sure how much we can quantify available resources. I suspect at some point we may end up needing a probe quota for a node (especially for heavier exec probes.)

Author: nod... incorporating

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7c2e6125694e1aadc78a5fed1cf696872af50a5e/pkg/kubelet/prober/worker.go#L131-L167
```go
func (w *worker) run() {
	probeTickerPeriod := time.Duration(w.spec.PeriodSeconds) * time.Second

	// If kubelet restarted the probes could be started in rapid succession.
	// Let the worker wait for a random portion of tickerPeriod before probing.
	// Do it only if the kubelet has started recently.
	if probeTickerPeriod > time.Since(w.probeManager.start) {
		time.Sleep(time.Duration(rand.Float64() * float64(probeTickerPeriod)))
	}

	probeTicker := time.NewTicker(probeTickerPeriod)

	defer func() {
		// Clean up.
		probeTicker.Stop()
		if !w.containerID.IsEmpty() {
			w.resultsManager.Remove(w.containerID)
		}

		w.probeManager.removeWorker(w.pod.UID, w.container.Name, w.probeType)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsSuccessfulMetricLabels)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsFailedMetricLabels)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsUnknownMetricLabels)
	}()

probeLoop:
	for w.doProbe() {
		// Wait for next probe tick.
		select {
		case <-w.stopCh:
			break probeLoop
		case <-probeTicker.C:
		case <-w.manualTriggerCh:
			// continue
		}
	}
}
```

> ### Summary

Reviewer 2: Should be folded up to top level summary?

		obj.TimeoutSeconds = 1
	}
```

 - Period Seconds is the biggest hurdle in charging and overall cost to the cluster, but also the most useful if set correctly.
PeriodSeconds defaults to 10 seconds if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). Fast failure detections are thus blocked with existing defaults.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L227-L229

```go
	if obj.PeriodSeconds == 0 {
		obj.PeriodSeconds = 10
	}
```

#### Validation of fields

Must be non-negative, Zero or greater.
```go
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.InitialDelaySeconds), fldPath.Child("initialDelaySeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.TimeoutSeconds), fldPath.Child("timeoutSeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.PeriodSeconds), fldPath.Child("periodSeconds"))...)

```

#### Fields to Add
What fields may be necessary to add?

In pkg/apis/core/types.go

```go

type Probe struct {
    ...
    ...
    // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe.
	// +optional

> 	PeriodMilliseconds *int32

Reviewer 2: Will this be applied to every iteration or just the first? 
If to the first, maybe the name should be more expressive - `FirstPeriodOffsetMilliseconds` ? TBH, I am a bit concerned how intuitive this is to end users.

Author: nod will document in more detail on the api and field comment.. idea is shorter period until success longer period would continue... 1.5 period... would continue .5 period would continue till success as suggested.. .5, 1, 1.5..success 2.5, 3.5...

	// Length of time (in milliseconds) to offset IntialDelaySeconds before health checking is activated.
	// +optional

> 	InitialDelayMilliseconds *int32

Reviewer 2: This one could technically supersede the old field. e.g.  1400 milliseconds instead of spreading it across 2 fields.

Author: nod

Author: also keeping the mills fields to [-999,999] seems to be fair and works with period without doing it one way for one field and another for others.. defaults not always being zero sort of made this hard..

	// Length of time (in milliseconds) to offset TimeoutMilliseconds before health checking times out.
	// +optional

> 	TimeoutMilliseconds *int32 (*** removed from alpha)

Reviewer 2: This could also replace the old field.

Author: nod removed for alpha though

}

```
#### Logic for Added Fields
What is the least logic that could be used?

> The combined value of `PeriodSeconds` and `PeriodMilliseconds` must be greater than 200ms and greater than 500ms for exec probe. And after success falls back to original seconds value.

Reviewer 2: It is not clear if these offsets will be applied only once or for each iteration in the KEP uptil this line.

Author: added to a few other places to make it more clear... clean up the explanations.. thx!

Reviewer 5: Also add up top please.

to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

Unit tests, end-to-end tests, and performance tests/benchmarks will need to be added.

For actual tests to be added, see [the draft implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/107958/commits)

##### Unit tests

Will add unit tests for new code, specifically in:

- `pkg/api/pod`: `2022-10-03` - `70.1`
- `pkg/apis/core/validation`: `2022-10-03` - `82.3`
- `pkg/kubelet/prober`: `2022-10-03` - `80.7`

##### Integration tests

Not adding integration tests (will be covered by e2e). 

##### e2e tests

Will add e2e tests to `test/e2e/common/node/container_probe.go` to (a) run a sub-second probe, and (b) ensure the sub-second probe completes faster than a standard (1s) probe.

### Graduation Criteria

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

### Version Skew Strategy

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

* **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**
  - [ X ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: SubSecondProbes

>     - Components depending on the feature gate:

Reviewer 7: kube-apiserver and kubelet, presumably?

  - [ ] Other
    - Describe the mechanism:
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
      plane?
    - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
      of a node? (Do not assume `Dynamic Kubelet Config` feature is enabled).

* **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**
  Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
  automations, so be extremely careful here.

  No

* **Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back
  the enablement)?**
  Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
  Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
  feature, can it break the existing applications?).

>   Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

Reviewer 8: This link appears to be stale, could you update it to a valid link for review purposes?

>   Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9403b8a7fe61d826a9552edad6ce13df7bad903c/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L891)
```

* **What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?**

  No breaking changes

* **Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?**

>   Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

Reviewer 8: This link seems to be stale, could we update this to reflect a valid link for review purposes?

>   Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9403b8a7fe61d826a9552edad6ce13df7bad903c/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L891)
```

Reviewer 9: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/9403b8a7fe61d826a9552edad6ce13df7bad903c/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L891 is 404 now.

		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsSuccessfulMetricLabels)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsFailedMetricLabels)
		ProberResults.Delete(w.proberResultsUnknownMetricLabels)
	}()

probeLoop:
	for w.doProbe() {
		// Wait for next probe tick.
		select {
		case <-w.stopCh:
			break probeLoop
		case <-probeTicker.C:
		case <-w.manualTriggerCh:
			// continue
		}
	}
}
```

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

Unit tests, end-to-end tests, and performance tests/benchmarks will need to be added.
For actual tests to be added, see [the draft implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/107958/commits)

##### Unit tests

Will add unit tests for new code, specifically in:
- `pkg/api/pod`: `2022-10-03` - `70.1`
- `pkg/apis/core/validation`: `2022-10-03` - `82.3`
- `pkg/kubelet/prober`: `2022-10-03` - `80.7`

##### Integration tests

Not adding integration tests (will be covered by e2e). 

##### e2e tests

> Will add e2e tests to `test/e2e/common/node/container_probe.go` to (a) run a sub-second probe, and (b) ensure the sub-second probe completes faster than a standard (1s) probe.

Reviewer: We have to add performance/scale tests for this feature, since TCP/HTTP probes can exhaust quickly all the conntrack or ephemeral ports available in the node https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/89898#issuecomment-1383207322

The number of probes is equal to PrxCxP
- Pr: probe per containers that can be readines, liveness and/or startup
- C: containers per Pod
- P: number of pods

Assume a worst case of 100 pods with 2 containers each and 3 probes per container configured with 1 seconds
100x2x3 x 1 req/sec = 600 req per second.

To free the socket the OS has to wait for the TIME_WAIT period (default 60sec), and that will free the port and the conntrack entry.

These network resources are governed by these options
```
cat /proc/sys/net/ipv4/ip_local_port_range
32768   60999 

net.netfilter.nf_conntrack_max = 262144
```

This means that a rate of 600 request per second (we are not going to free resources until 60 second later), we'll be holding 600x59 = 35400 ephemeral ports and we only have 28321 per default.

This means that kubelet can not create any new connection and we are still not using subsecond.

I have plans to alleviate this problem https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/89898#issuecomment-1384673191 , but I really think that this KEP should take this into account add e2e test should be part of this, maybe not for alpha but I really think for beta we should require performance/scale validation for something that operates at the subsecond level

cc: @wojtek-t @johnbelamaric

Reviewer: I showed my ignorance about probes, it seems readiness and start probes have some interesting behavior, but besides that the network part are ok.

The good thing is that I have a PR to fix it and I have a test how probes behave at scale, that can be modified to test this new feature
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/115143/commits/44f9c521abcbcca84a3d009d65a276c54164a4c6

Reviewer: ok, one thing I need to verify because someone with more knowledge than me in this area told me, is that the ephemeral port range may depend only on the 5-tuple, so different pods should be able to reuse the same ephemeral port for probes? that will make this problem less critical, still stands the one that are a considerable amount of resources used

Better performance in the form of faster startups, more timely readiness checks...

#### Knative

For example, Knative will create Pods (via Deployment) and wait for them to become `Ready`
when handling an HTTP request from an end-user. In this case, Pod readiness
latency has a direct impact on HTTP request latency. (In the steady state,
Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

An ability to specify probe durations that have more granularity, more specificity, than just zero,
one, or n-seconds. Focus is on possibly faster readiness probes, for example every .5 seconds until succss
and more granular use beyond existing defaults, for example 1.5 second duration instead of picking
between 1 or 2 second duration.
Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.
Not breaking backwards compatibility with the V1 API.

### Non-Goals

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from `int32` to `resource.Quantity`.

## Proposal

TLDR:
Add two new optional fields (of type `*int32`) to the Probe struct, which would be used to offset the second based time values in the Probe struct:

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Author: nod.. will update description to reflect naming decision from the offset option below:  https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/3067/files#r819907064

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Reviewer 10: It can be updated after this feature lands and gets API review, so not a blocker to merge the KEP.

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Author: well it's plus or minus.. we've gone back and forth on naming for this one many times..

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Author: it's an offset in mills from the seconds..   e.g. 1 sec +-500mills resulting in .5sec or 1.5sec in total .. the mills being the offset from the seconds field..

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Author: initialDelaySeconds 0 initialDelayMilliseconds  500
periodSeconds 5

first probe should be at 500mills .. then wait 5sec for second probe

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Reviewer 11: I thought this was describing a period of rapid polling until the probe succeeds? Initial delay is something different?

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Author: Not sure we are in sync yet.. maybe a call?

The idea here is the initial delay and period, being defined as whole seconds, is too coarse.  Without creating a v2 api for probes and to keep probes backwards compatible.. this proposal is to introduce fine grained offsets for the these course fields. E.g. where it it known the initial delay needs to be at least 1.5 seconds the admin/developer must choose 2seconds today.. and with this feature may define 2seconds minus 500mills resulting in 1.5seconds with the gate on and 2seconds with the gate off..

> - `PeriodMilliseconds`       // How often (in milliseconds) to offset PeriodSeconds when performing the probe (*** to reduce un-necessary resource usage, when periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer).

Author: WRT rapid polling before success.. a limit must be set on the period to avoid the probe DOSing the node. This would apply to the budget discussion, as opposed to the overtly simple measure of limiting arguably expensive exec probes to up to twice as fast as they are today until success.. and cheaper probe types to 200mils (or up to 5x faster.) Similarly noting that it's not necessarily "faster" the author may simply prefer a value between two seconds instead of a first whole second or the first +1second.

- `InitialDelayMilliseconds` // Length of time (in milliseconds) to offset IntialDelaySeconds before health checking is activated.

The seconds and milliseconds fields (as related) will be summed to get the resulting time duration. For example,

```yaml
...
#yaml
periodSeconds: 1
periodMilliseconds: 500
...
```

would be considered a period value of 1.5s or 1500ms. These values are used as `time.Duration` within the prober package ([ex1](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/a750d8054a6cb3167f495829ce3e77ab0ccca48e/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go#L161) [ex2](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/a750d8054a6cb3167f495829ce3e77ab0ccca48e/pkg/kubelet/prober/worker.go#L132) ), so there's no real difference between 1.5s and 1500ms.

A few additional examples:

`periodSeconds: 2` and `periodMilliseconds: -500` would be 1.5s / 1500ms.

> `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodMilliseconds: -500` would be 0.5s / 500ms. (*** To reduce un-necessary resource usage, because periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer becoming 1second after success.***)

Reviewer 12: Can we draw out the state-machine for probes and consider how this changes that, specifically in the context of  startup, readiness, and liveness actually being different?

In the past we have added fields to probes that don't apply to all modes and it's gross.

Author: kep does not intend to modify success/failure threshold counts / process.

> `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodMilliseconds: -500` would be 0.5s / 500ms. (*** To reduce un-necessary resource usage, because periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer becoming 1second after success.***)

Author: initialDelaySeconds 5
periodSeconds 30

> `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodMilliseconds: -500` would be 0.5s / 500ms. (*** To reduce un-necessary resource usage, because periodMilliseconds is used to reduce the period to less than a second the offset is only used until success is reached then no longer becoming 1second after success.***)

Author: suggest modifying the datastructure comments to reflect the documentation and implementation better.

*** We can reconsider the only go faster until first success policy after alpha (eg. kubelet and/or probe policy for onlyTheFirstTime, always, alwaysWhenWaitingForSucess) ***

More generally, the effective period value would be = `periodSeconds` + `periodMilliseconds`.

There are a few corner cases around default (effective period) values:

> `periodSeconds: 0` and `periodMilliseconds: 500` would be 10.5s / 10500ms (as 0 => 10 for `periodSeconds` via [defaults.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3b13e9445a3bf86c94781c898f224e6690399178/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L213-L215))

Reviewer 12: I think we should fail in that case, no?  Sorry, you can't use MS unless you also specify S.  Any existing pod will still be OK, right?

Author: nod will update.. should fail, if one wants mills offset must say from any int except 0, because...

Each optional millisecond field will be restricted to [-999,999], and the effective sum will never be allowed

> to be less than 0 (if the effective sum is less than 0, it will fail at the validation stage and block deployments).

Reviewer 11: Do we really want to allow 1ms probes?

Author: no. a min will be selected prob .5sec... see line 178 below

to https://github.com/kubernetes/perf-tests may suffice.

Question raised of how probes should be charged: charging is an issue for all exec/attach/port forward requests, and as usual the process in the container should be charged to the container/pod. This KEP isn't looking to make any major architectural changes in this regard.

#### Overriding an existing field

However, this change would be done on a probe by probe basis and would be opt-in. Meaning that the default behavior will not change unless a user specifically added the millisecond fields to their spec. Absent that specific opt-in by using the new fields, existing users not being impacted by this change (gate on/off) will be tested.

## Design Details

Draft PR:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/107958/commits

A quick highlighting of key points:

* Implementing a feature gate (`SubSecondProbes`) to gate the feature

* Adding three additional, optional fields to the Probe struct type:

```go
PeriodMilliseconds *int32 //note these are signed offset
InitialDelayMilliseconds *int32

> TimeoutMilliseconds *int32

Reviewer 11: I thought timeout was out of scope for the alpha?

Author: nod.. this was left over.. to describe how it could be implemented... in a follow up.

### Existing Behavior

Taking the Seconds fields, in order of the struct.
InitialDelaySeconds
TimeoutSeconds
PeriodSeconds

#### Defaulting logic
 - InitialDelaySeconds, has no defaulting logic.
   Therefore it would get the golang defaulting logic, and default to 0.
 - TimeoutSeconds, defaults to 1 second if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). This is the last ending time before the timeout fails. Defaulting, thus, results in slow failures (when one considers a full second of time in cpu time).
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L224-L226

```go
 	if obj.TimeoutSeconds == 0 {
		obj.TimeoutSeconds = 1
	}
```

 - Period Seconds is the biggest hurdle in charging and overall cost to the cluster, but also the most useful if set correctly.
PeriodSeconds defaults to 10 seconds if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). Fast failure detections are thus blocked with existing defaults.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L227-L229

```go
	if obj.PeriodSeconds == 0 {
		obj.PeriodSeconds = 10
	}
```

> #### Validation of fields

Reviewer 11: This needs a lot more detail. Somewhere above you said that the millis fields are capped in +/-999, but I think that also conflicts with the approach to the initial fast polling. Also the validation based on probe types.

Author: nod +- 999 && with the additional bottom limit based on probe type

I appreciate the possible alternate implementation pattern you were thinking about, would like to discuss that in the context of gate off and/or backwards compatible nodes ignoring the mills offsets.

### Existing use of Probe struct fields.

#### InitialDelaySeconds
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7c2e6125694e1aadc78a5fed1cf696872af50a5e/pkg/kubelet/prober/worker.go#L246-L249
```go
	// Probe disabled for InitialDelaySeconds.
	if int32(time.Since(c.State.Running.StartedAt.Time).Seconds()) < w.spec.InitialDelaySeconds {
		return true
	}
```

#### TimeoutSeconds
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7c2e6125694e1aadc78a5fed1cf696872af50a5e/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober.go#L160-L213
```go
	timeout := time.Duration(p.TimeoutSeconds) * time.Second
```

#### ProbeSeconds
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/7c2e6125694e1aadc78a5fed1cf696872af50a5e/pkg/kubelet/prober/worker.go#L131-L167
```go
func (w *worker) run() {
	probeTickerPeriod := time.Duration(w.spec.PeriodSeconds) * time.Second

	// If kubelet restarted the probes could be started in rapid succession.
	// Let the worker wait for a random portion of tickerPeriod before probing.
	// Do it only if the kubelet has started recently.
	if probeTickerPeriod > time.Since(w.probeManager.start) {
		time.Sleep(time.Duration(rand.Float64() * float64(probeTickerPeriod)))

> 	}

Reviewer 11: which period does this use for jitter? The fast initial one, or the steady state?

Author: period is after initial.. thus jitter is being applied to steady state..

Liveness probes and more granular timeouts may be investigated in a followup KEP.

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary to implement this enhancement.

##### Unit tests

<!--
In principle every added code should have complete unit test coverage, so providing
the exact set of tests will not bring additional value.
However, if complete unit test coverage is not possible, explain the reason of it
together with explanation why this is acceptable.
-->

<!--
Additionally, for Alpha try to enumerate the core package you will be touching
to implement this enhancement and provide the current unit coverage for those
in the form of:
- <package>: <date> - <current test coverage>
The data can be easily read from:
https://testgrid.k8s.io/sig-testing-canaries#ci-kubernetes-coverage-unit

This can inform certain test coverage improvements that we want to do before
extending the production code to implement this enhancement.
-->

> Existing unit tests of prober `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/kubelet/prober/prober_manager_test.go`.

Reviewer 10: Can you list the current package's coverage per the comment above?

Author: ok..

Author: current prober package unit coverage is at 80.5% .. will add to kep

- `<package>`: `<date>` - `<test coverage>` TBD

##### Integration tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html
-->

> - <test>: <link to test coverage> TBD, will focus on unit and e2e

Reviewer 10: Are any integration tests planned?

Author: we hit all the unit and e2e buckets we found and enhanced them for more coverage and to test the new feature.. which buckets are the integration ones?

Reviewer 10: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/integration/

Author: looked that over a bit didn't find any probe test buckets.. will chat with some of the kubelet devs

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, add links to added tests together with links to k8s-triage for those tests:
https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
-->

- <test>: <link to test coverage> TBD

- Existing node-e2e test: `k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/common/container_probe.go`

> Enhanced with additional test cases, see the buckets added in [the draft implementation](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/107958/commits)

Reviewer 10: Can we shortly list them here?

Author: ok..

### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag

> - Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

Reviewer 10: e2e will require to be run in a alpha enabled cluster, I'd suggest starting with unit and integation, since those are easy to write, and can run with every PR, b/c you can easily turn on and off feature flags there.

Author: nod we have a improved the unit (integration?) buckets including those that run with and without the feature flag

## Production Readiness Review Questionnaire

<!--

Production readiness reviews are intended to ensure that features merging into
Kubernetes are observable, scalable and supportable; can be safely operated in
production environments, and can be disabled or rolled back in the event they
cause increased failures in production. See more in the PRR KEP at
https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-architecture/1194-prod-readiness.

The production readiness review questionnaire must be completed and approved
for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

_This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release._

> * **How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?**

Reviewer 13: nit: switch to new format starting with ######

  - [ X ] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
    - Feature gate name: SubSecondProbes
    - Components depending on the feature gate:
		kube-apiserver and kubelet

> * **Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?**

Reviewer 13: Same here

  No

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

>   Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

Reviewer 10: Can we shortly describe the test, the link most likely will not age well.

Author: ok..

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

>   No breaking changes

Reviewer 10: If you previously set the new fields, and due to problems rolled it back, does the field gets cleaned or not? What happens after you enable this back, in that case?

Author: ok will add details..

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

>   Yes, see the [drop test](https://github.com/psschwei/kubernetes/blob/1ca40771e26b96d6121c49b19c2cbe6466694c7a/pkg/api/pod/util_test.go#L1029)

Reviewer 10: Can we list here explicitly what kind of tests is here, this link will not age well.

Author: ok

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

_This section must be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release._

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

TBD, no failures identified as possible at this time

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

> TBD

Reviewer 10: I'd suggest thinking through metrics early on, to simplify the decision that will drive rollback at later stages.

Author: ok.. in general any metrics showing an unexpected degradation of resource utilization
================================================================
container_cpu_usage_seconds_total
container_memory_working_set_bytes
container_start_time_seconds
node_cpu_usage_seconds_total
node_memory_working_set_bytes
pod_cpu_usage_seconds_total
pod_memory_working_set_bytes
scheduler_pending_pods
scheduler_pod_scheduling_attempts
scheduler_pod_scheduling_duration_seconds
scheduler_preemption_attempts_total
scheduler_preemption_victims
scheduler_queue_incoming_pods_total
scheduler_schedule_attempts_total
scheduler_scheduling_attempt_duration_seconds
kubelet_*all resource utilization and error processing related metrics
node_*    ""     ""
pod_swap_usage_bytes
prober_probe_duration_seconds
prober_probe_total

..

Reviewer 10: I'd suggest calling out a few, explaining what cluster admin should look for when trying to better understand issues with this functionality.

Author: ok..

implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->
### Dependencies

This section will be completed when targeting beta graduation to a release.

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

<!--
Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
control plane.

For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->
### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

Enabling / using this feature will not result in any new API calls.
See earlier KEP text regarding limits and scaling (to zero the millisecond offsets)

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

> No new scalability API types.

Reviewer 13: s/scalability API types/API types/ 

[there is no such thing as scalability API types]

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No new calls to the cloud provider will be provided.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

Enabling this feature will not necessarily result in increasing size or count of

> the existing API objects. (3 optional omit if nil *int32 fields for each probe)

Reviewer 10: I'd explicitly call out what's the potential impact (size) of having a `*int32` set per container.

Author: ok.. will update 
```
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"reflect"
	"runtime"
)

func main() {
var num int32 = 0
var ptr *int32 = &num

i := reflect.TypeOf(num)
fmt.Printf("size of int32 %d bytes\n", i.Size())

p := reflect.TypeOf(ptr)
fmt.Printf("size of a ptr on this platform %d bytes\n", p.Size())

fmt.Printf("The cost of 3 optional omit if nil *int32 fields is %d bytes for each probe on %s %s\n", (p.Size()+i.Size())*3, runtime.GOOS, runtime.GOARCH)

fmt.Println("The potential size increase of the serialized json struct is dependent on the number of chars it takes to represent the new values if used.") 

}
```
size of int32 4 bytes
size of a ptr on this platform 8 bytes
The cost of 3 optional omit if nil *int32 fields is 36 bytes for each probe on linux amd64
The potential size increase of the serialized json struct is dependent on the number of chars it takes to represent the new values if used.

Reviewer 10: To the doc please.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

Enabling / using this feature will result in changing the time taken (and thus charging) by certain

> operations covered by [existing SLIs/SLOs]. Whether Negatively/Positively will be determined by

Reviewer 13: Can you be more specific? I don't understand what you mean by that (in particular which SLI/SLO).

customers and testing in Beta. Thus, this KEP provides for mitigation in the form of larger
minimums and scaling of the millisecond offsets to zero.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

Enabling / using this feature will result in changes to resource usage
(CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in kubelet and runtime coponents. This KEP provides for
mitigation of the changes.

Reducing the probe frequency to subsecond intervals will result in probes polling slightly more
frequently until success, as mitigated for exec probes and restricting to startup and readyness.

In a follow up KEP further mitigations and allowances may be considered based on resource
pressure, use cases for liveness probes, and if exec probe costs can be reduced via
architecual changes.

> 

Reviewer 13: there is one more new question added to the template - please copy and fill in

-->

#### Istio

TODO(???): explain this scenario, presumably around sidecar readiness?

#### Knative

Knative will create Pods (via Deployment) and wait for them to become `Ready`
when handling an HTTP request from an end-user. In this case, Pod readiness
latency has a direct impact on HTTP request latency. (In the steady state,
Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
An ability to specify timeouts that are less than one second.
Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.

? link to existing test cases ?

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from int32 to resource.Quantity.
Subsecond resolution less than one millisecond.

## Proposal

Add a new field: ReadSecondsAs string (“seconds” || “milliseconds”) where default "" translates to "seconds"

If using “milliseconds” the minimums would need to be no less than 100millseconds

> and defaults will be set to existing values in seconds.

Reviewer 4: to clarify, the effective value of `periodSeconds` would be:

`periodSeconds + periodSecondsOffset`.

Ex: to probe on a 100ms interval (i.e. at 100ms, 200ms, 300ms, ...), set `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodSecondsOffset: -900ms`

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L224-L226
```
 	if obj.TimeoutSeconds == 0 {
		obj.TimeoutSeconds = 1
	}
```
 - Period Seconds is the biggest hurdle, but also the most useful.
PeriodSeconds defaults to 10 seconds if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). Fast Successes.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L227-L229
```
	if obj.PeriodSeconds == 0 {
		obj.PeriodSeconds = 10
	}
```

#### Validation of fields

Must be non-negative, Zero or greater.
```
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.InitialDelaySeconds), fldPath.Child("initialDelaySeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.TimeoutSeconds), fldPath.Child("timeoutSeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.PeriodSeconds), fldPath.Child("periodSeconds"))...)

```

#### Fields to Add
What fields may be necessary to add?
```

> 	// Units to use for PeriodSeconds. Allowed values are "seconds" and "milliseconds".
> 	// If using "milliseconds", the minimum allowed value for PeriodSeconds is 100ms, and defaults
> 	// will be set to existing values in seconds.
> 	// +optional
> 	ReadSecondsAs string

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

var Offset struct {
    value int32
    unit string
}

PeriodSecondsOffset *Offset
TimeoutSecondsOffset *Offset
InitialDelaySecondsOffset *Offset
```

```
#### Logic for Added Fields
What is the least logic that could be used?

> If `ReadSecondsAs` does not equal either `seconds` or `milliseconds`, then return a `field.Invalid()` error.
> 
> A `ReadSecondsAs` value of `""` (empty string) will operate the same as if the value was `seconds`.
> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The absolute value of an offset must be less than one second. As an example for offset `A` (in pseudo-code): 

`| A.value * A.unit | < 1 * time.Second`

Also `A.unit` must be able to convert to a valid subsecond value, i.e. `time.Millisecond`, `time.Microsecond`, or `time.Nanosecond`.

`A = nil` will have no impact on probe values. For example, if `periodSeconds: 1` and `periodSecondsOffset: nil`, there would be no change to `periodSeconds`. 
```

* **What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?**

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Combine old and new fields

> Allow for 0 second Probe, with setting millisecond.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Allow for 0 second Probe, with setting millisecond. Similar to what is done with `tv_sec` and `tv_nsec` from POSIX time structs.
```

Cons:
Loosens validation.

### v2 api for probe.

I think this means a v2 API for Container therefore Pod.
This seems too invasive.

All Seconds fields become resource.Quantity instead of int32. This supports subdivision in a single field.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

### Change time unit of probe time values

Example: 
    Existing Field: PeriodSeconds int32
    New Field: ReadSecondsAs *string
    
    If I want to set to 500ms / 0.5s:
    PeriodSeconds = 500
    ReadSecondsAs = "milliseconds"
    
Pros:
minimal changes to API (only adding one field)

Cons:
requires conversion back to seconds on legacy versions (does 1.5s round up or down?)        
```

> ### OffsetMilliseconds

Reviewer 4: @mikebrow can remove this section from the alternatives since it's the main proposal now

Author: nod let's focus in on the offset milliseconds option since and fix the naming above..

Use a negative offset, and combine with the existing field.

Example:
    Existing Field: int32 PeriodSeconds
    New Field:      int32 PeriodOffsetMilliseconds

    If I want to set to 0.5 seconds, 500 milliseconds,

>     PeriodSeconds <= 10 & PeriodOffsetmilliseconds <= -9500

Reviewer 14: This is an example of a pair of values that could be ambiguous for round-tripping, forcing future APIs to store and track both pieces of data.

By contrast, if we had:
```yaml
....
   periodSeconds: 1
   earlyRecheckOffset:
      - unit: Millisecond 
        value: 500
...
```

and the v1 Pod API doesn't allow ambiguous values, then a future v2 Pod API can store a single field value behind the scenes
(eg: `periodMicroseconds = 500000u64`)

Reviewer 14: Another option, still clamped to less than 1s:
By contrast, if we had:
```yaml
...
   periodSeconds: 0
   extraRecheckOffset:
      - unit: Millisecond 
        value: 500
...
```

motivation section can optionally provide links to [experience reports] to
demonstrate the interest in a KEP within the wider Kubernetes community.

[experience reports]: https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/ExperienceReports
-->

#### Istio

TODO(???): explain this scenario, presumably around sidecar readiness?

#### Knative

Knative will create Pods (via Deployment) and wait for them to become `Ready`
when handling an HTTP request from an end-user. In this case, Pod readiness
latency has a direct impact on HTTP request latency. (In the steady state,
Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
An ability to specify timeouts that are less than one second.
Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.

? link to existing test cases ?

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from int32 to resource.Quantity.

> Subsecond resolution less than one millisecond.

Reviewer 14: I'd omit this non-goal; it sounds more like a design choice than a goal we're not pursuing.

Author: kk

## Proposal - Plan-A

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->
Add a new int32 field to existing Probe struct for timeoutSeconds that exists of timeoutMilliseconds.

int32 data type is used for consistency with existing fields.

Using the fully available range of an int32 with a maximum value of 2147483647 represents a value of ~24.8 days.

If the Milliseconds variant of a field is set,
*use it in preference* to the existing Seconds field,
and **completely ignore** the value of the existing field.

> This behavior makes it opt-in on setting a non-zero Milliseconds field.

Reviewer 14: If there is an existing admission control mechanism that enforces constraints on `timeoutSeconds`, does this (draft)  change break any API contract that the admission control mechanism is entitled to assume?

Author: @ehashman recommended in the sig node call that we forgo the alternate fields idea and move to adding a new flag to  indicate seconds should be processed as milliseconds.. etc.

great point on we will need to check for admission control impacts..

and defaults will be set to existing values in seconds.

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Knative

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

Changing defaults is a strict no-go.

Accidentally setting a timeout too low could DOS kubelet if many are used.
Mitigate by preventing timeout values too small.
Could be configurable,

> 10-100milliseconds is a first guess.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
100milliseconds is a first guess.
```

UX reviewed by existing users of Probe struct.
? add details on who that is?

#### Overriding an existing field

> How does the change to overriding a field effect the users of the existing field.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
How does the change to overriding a field effect the users of the existing field.

Currently, the time fields in the Probe struct only use values in seconds. Since this KEP proposes allowing a change of the units on those fields, that could be considered an override. 

However, this change would be done on a probe by probe basis and would be opt-in. Meaning that the default behavior would not change unless the probe specifically added the `ReadSecondsAs` field to their spec. Absent that specific opt-in by using the new field, existing users should not be impacted.
```

[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

What do preexisting readers of the field do?
They are not aware that they should ignore the seconds and use millis.
To address this, we should set whole second probe value to the minimum allowed if milliseconds is set.

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.

> -->

Reviewer 14: Allowing microseconds might be useful if we support future healthcheck mechanisms.

### Combine old and new fields

Allow for 0 second Probe, with setting millisecond.

Cons:
Loosens validation.

### v2 api for probe.

I think this means a v2 API for Container therefore Pod.
This seems too invasive.

> All Seconds fields become resource.Quantity instead of int32. This supports subdivision in a single field.

Reviewer 14: The bigger problem is how to support round-tripping to the (still GA) v1 API. Even if we did a v2 API, we'd need a way to represent the subsecond timeout in the v1 API, right?

(I'm personally all for adopting a v2 Pod and v2 PodTemplate API, but lots of clients would expect to still create v1 Deployments, etc).

Author: nod

> ### OffsetMilliseconds

Reviewer 14: We could frame this or something like it as an “early probe failure offset”: if set, the probe is allowed fail up to _n_ ms before it normally would (probes can always succeed early).

It would be nice to clamp this value to a maximum of 999 at admission time; 1000 ms or more being something you should achieve through the seconds field.

Author: pinged you on slack.. let's try to setup a call if you have some time to spare .. cheers

Reviewer 14: I'm happy to consider this as addressed.

Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
An ability to specify timeouts that are less than one second.
Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.

? link to existing test cases ?

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from int32 to resource.Quantity.

## Proposal

Add a new struct, `ProbeOffset`, with two subfields: `unit` (type string) and value (type int32). 

That struct would be used to create three new fields in a Probe: 
- `periodSecondsOffset`
- `initialDelaySecondsOffset`
- `timeoutSecondsOffset`

The offset would be used to adjust the timing intervals within probes, by adding the offset value to the probe value. For example,

    ```golang
    ...
    periodSeconds: 1
    periodSecondsOffset:
        - unit: Milliseconds
          value: -500
    ```

would translate to a `periodSecond` value of `500ms`. 

> `periodSeconds: 1` and `offset: 500ms` would translate to `1.5s`. 
> 
> To have an effective `periodSeconds` of `1.5`, either of the following could work:
> * `periodSeconds: 1`, `offset: 500ms`
> * `periodSeconds: 2`, `offset: -500ms`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A few additional examples:

`periodSeconds: 2` and `offset: 500ms` would be `1.5s`

`periodSeconds: 1` and `offset: 900ms` would be `0.1s`

`periodSeconds: 1` and `offset: 100ms` would be `0.9s`

More generally, the effective periodSeconds value would be = `periodSeconds` - `periodSecondsOffset`.
```

> Each offset would be restricted to an absolute value less than `1s`, and the offset would never allow the adjusted interval to be less than 0 (if it was less than 0, it would get failed at the validation stage).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Each offset would be restricted to a value less than `1s`, and the offset would never allow the adjusted interval to be less than 0 (if it was less than 0, it would get failed at the validation stage).
```

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L224-L226
```
 	if obj.TimeoutSeconds == 0 {
		obj.TimeoutSeconds = 1
	}
```
 - Period Seconds is the biggest hurdle, but also the most useful.
PeriodSeconds defaults to 10 seconds if unset (which includes the explicitly set to 0 state). Fast Successes.
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/e19964183377d0ec2052d1f1fa930c4d7575bd50/pkg/apis/core/v1/defaults.go#L227-L229
```
	if obj.PeriodSeconds == 0 {
		obj.PeriodSeconds = 10
	}
```

#### Validation of fields

Must be non-negative, Zero or greater.
```
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.InitialDelaySeconds), fldPath.Child("initialDelaySeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.TimeoutSeconds), fldPath.Child("timeoutSeconds"))...)
	allErrs = append(allErrs, ValidateNonnegativeField(int64(probe.PeriodSeconds), fldPath.Child("periodSeconds"))...)

```

#### Fields to Add
What fields may be necessary to add?
```

var Offset struct {

>     value int32

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    value uint32
```

    unit string
}

PeriodSecondsOffset *Offset
TimeoutSecondsOffset *Offset
InitialDelaySecondsOffset *Offset
```
#### Logic for Added Fields
What is the least logic that could be used?

> The absolute value of an offset must be less than one second. As an example for offset `A` (in pseudo-code): 
> 
> `| A.value * A.unit | < 1 * time.Second`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The value of an offset must be less than one second. As an example for offset `A` (in pseudo-code): 

`A.value * A.unit  < 1 * time.Second`
```

* **What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?**

[supported limits]: https://git.k8s.io/community//sig-scalability/configs-and-limits/thresholds.md
[existing SLIs/SLOs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/slos/slos.md#kubernetes-slisslos

## Implementation History

<!--
Major milestones in the lifecycle of a KEP should be tracked in this section.
Major milestones might include:
- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

### Using signed integers for the offset

Allow for the offset to be specified as either +/-, i.e. `1.5s` could be done as either `1s + 500ms` or `2s - 500ms`

Pros:
Allows for more granular control of legacy behavior (no rounding)

Cons:
Potentially ambiguous round-tripping in a future v2 API
```

when handling an HTTP request from an end-user. In this case, Pod readiness
latency has a direct impact on HTTP request latency. (In the steady state,
Knative will re-use an existing Pod, but this situation can happen on scale-up,
and is guaranteed to happen on scale-from-zero.)

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->
An ability to specify timeouts that are less than one second.
Add additional tests cases to the timeout test cases.

? link to existing test cases ?

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

V2 API for existing objects.
Converting fields from int32 to resource.Quantity.

## Proposal

Add a new struct, `ProbeOffset`, with two subfields: `unit` (type string) and value (type uint32). 

That struct would be used to create three new fields in a Probe: 
- `periodSecondsOffset`
- `initialDelaySecondsOffset`
- `timeoutSecondsOffset`

The offset would be used to adjust the timing intervals within probes, by adding the offset value to the probe value. For example,

    ```yaml
    ...
    periodSeconds: 1

>     periodSecondsOffset:

Reviewer 7: I find this very unintuitive and verbose as well.

- the `Summary` and `Motivation` sections being merged, signaling SIG acceptance
- the `Proposal` section being merged, signaling agreement on a proposed design
- the date implementation started
- the first Kubernetes release where an initial version of the KEP was available
- the version of Kubernetes where the KEP graduated to general availability
- when the KEP was retired or superseded
-->

## Drawbacks

<!--
Why should this KEP _not_ be implemented?
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
What other approaches did you consider, and why did you rule them out? These do
not need to be as detailed as the proposal, but should include enough
information to express the idea and why it was not acceptable.
-->

### Using signed integers for the offset

Allow for the offset to be specified as either +/-, i.e. `1.5s` could be done as either `1s + 500ms` or `2s - 500ms`

Pros:
Allows for more granular control of legacy behavior (no rounding)

Cons:
Potentially ambiguous round-tripping in a future v2 API
### Combine old and new fields

Allow for 0 second Probe, with setting millisecond. Similar to what is done with `tv_sec` and `tv_nsec` from POSIX time structs.

Cons:

> Loosens validation.

Reviewer 7: So this proposal would just add a new field for each existing *Seconds field, like `PeriodSeconds` and `PeriodMilliseconds` and then the actual time is the sum? This seems like a *way* more intuitive and understandable API to me. It's also simpler to enter - just one new field instead of a new struct. And follows the existing *Seconds pattern. I am not seeing the downside? Validation can be done on the total duration as well as the individual fields, can't it?

Reviewer 14: Clients that don't recognise the new field would be liable to trigger much too early, right? How do we avoid that?

Also, how do we avoid setting a precedent that this riskier approach is the one to take.

Reviewer 7: Yeah, that's true. The lack of versioning at this granularity is a problem. Of course the "offset" has a similar problem (inaccurate interval from old clients). Here's another (maybe bad) idea:

on write:
  - if *Milliseconds is set, then set *Seconds = ceil(*Milliseconds/1000)
  - otherwise, set *Milliseconds = *Seconds * 1000

Then, on read, both will be set, and old clients will have a slightly longer interval.

    PeriodSeconds <= 10 & PeriodOffsetmilliseconds <= -9500
    OR
    PeriodSeconds <= 1 & PeriodOffsetmilliseconds <= -500
    OR
    PeriodSeconds unset, Default of 10, and PeriodOffsetmilliseconds <= -9500

Detail:
Same number of added fields.

Pros:
Uses the existing field, thus readers of only the existing field will still be acting on something that has been logically set. Without the compensation of a negative offset, the output doesn't make much sense as a decision is being made on half of the information, but there is a logical process to why behavior would occur, rather than allowing something to be set before throwing it out.

Cons:
Complicated logic.
Multiple ways to get same resulting time.
Changing behavior in the future involves touching more code than other solutions.

### Reconcile seconds field to nearest whole second.

Minimum of 1 second remains.

Extra logic in defaulter to use the milliseconds field and automatically set the seconds field, allowing those using the seconds field to get something close-enough. This doesn't make much sense for solving rapidity of probes, only for increasing the granularity, such as if I wanted to run

Pros:
Cons:

> 

Reviewer 14: The existing API guidelines say
> Duration fields must be represented as integer fields with units being part of the field name

so if for some of those options, if we adopt them I imagine that we also need to change the API guidelines.
